---
layout: post
title:  "How to model the progression of the Chinese coronavirus"
date: '2019-12-25 21:30:00'
---

## Introduction
December the 31st, the Chinese health autorities informed about a case of pneumonia of unknown origin. January the 3rd, another 43 cases were reported to the [WHO](https://www.who.int/). Twelve days later, the Chinese goverment had found that the pneumonias were all caused by a new type of [coronavirus](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/about/index.html) and traced back the origin of the disease to a with a seafood market in [Wuhan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wuhan).
One month later Wuhan is under lockdown, 170 persons have died, there are 7818 confirmed cases plus 12167 suspected cases, the virus has reached 17 more countries.
[!population]((/images/coronavirus-chino.jpeg)
In this post I am going to explain how to use numerical simulations to study and predict outbreaks like this one.
{: style="text-align: justify"}
<!--more-->

## The infection.
So far the amount of known information about the virus is very limited but there are some facts that seem to be clear.

1st. The causal agent is a new coronavirus named *2019-nCoV*: Coronaviruses are viruses that in most of the cases infect the respiratory system of mammals and bird. The synthoms range from a common cold to pneumonia or death. Since the 2019-nCoV has never been identified it is very likely that the natural reservoir of 2019-nCoV is non-human and it has just gained the ability to infect humans as a consecuence of mutations in its genetic material.

2nd. During these 30 days the virus has propagated following an exponential progression.

[!progression](/images/cov_progress.png)

3rd. The basic reproductive rate (R0) of 2019-nCoV seems to be something between 2 and 4. This parameter is the mean of new infections caused by an infected patient. As a reference the R0 of measles is around 15, of AIDS 4, and of ebola 1.5. As you will see later we will decompose this parameter in our simulation. 

## The first model. 

Looking at the data, the first thing that probably comes to your mind is that it seems that it would be possible to fit the progression of the disease to a simple exponential function like this one:

$$\[y=1+a·e^{b·x}\]$$

In R we can use the function nls to fit a non-linear function and find a and b, but nls needs a first approximation of a and b and we might not have a clue of where to start looking. 

A trick make a first guess of a and b is to transform the non-linear function in a linear function that can be approximated with a line by taking the logarithm at both sides of the equation.

$$\[log(y-1)=log(a)+bx\]$$

Now we can find a and b, since the intercept of the line in the y axis will be log(a) and the slope of the line will be b.
In R, we do this by using the lm function:

{% highlight r %}
linear<-lm(log(df$Infected-1)~df$Day)
start <- list(a=exp(coef(linear)[1]), b=coef(linear)[2])
{% endhighlight %}

Now that we have a first guess of a and b we use them as starting point to estimate the coeficients of the exponential fit:

{% highlight r %}
mod <- nls(Infected ~ a*(exp(b*Day)), data = df, start = start)
{% endhighlight %}

We can extract the coeficients and make predictions, in this case about the number of infected people on day 31

{% highlight r %}
a<-summary(mod)$coefficients[1,1]
b<-summary(mod)$coefficients[2,1]

Day<-31
prediction <- a*(exp(b*Day))
{% endhighlight %}

The model predicts that the 31st of January there will be 11437 cases. However the daily report of the WHO says that there are *only* 9826 (the green point in the graph). 
[modelexp1](/images/modelexp1.png)

Okey we have missed that one. Let's put that number into the equation and let's try to predict the number of patients on day 32: 13996. However the WHO says that the number is 11953 (the blue point of the graph). 

[modelexp2](/images/modelexp2.png)

Again it seems that our model is overestimating the number of cases and although we are still in the uncertainty range (the standard error for the parameter a is almost half of its value: a = 0.72012;  standard error of a = 0.33024) it is very likely that our exponential model will deviate more and more from the distribution of values something very good in this case, otherwise our model predicts that by the end of April the entire human population would be infected.

The main reason for this simple model to fail is just that it does not have into account most of the factors that have an impact in the progression of the disease. It can't predict how the disease would expand outside China, how it would progress in case of masive vaccinations, it doesnt' account for human other interventions such as quarentenes, lockdowns or prevention measures, it doesn't even take into account the number of deaths. 

## Numerical simulations vs functions

So far we have created a very basic model which takes into account just one parameter (time), however as I have mentioned few lines above, modeling infections requires introducing a lot a lot of parameters into the equations (e.g. natural immunity, population density, number of deaths, etc); however, creating such multivate functions can be so complex that in most of the case it not even possible from a practical point of view. 
On the other hand, numerical simulations are extremely poweful, we can add new constrains with a couple of lines code. They are so powerful that we could even simulate a virus spreading to a new country based on the traveling rates or what would happen if a vaccine is found and we start vaccinating the population at a certain rate. As a counterpart, the simulations can be slow if we add too many constrains or when simulating big populations. 

Let's see how to create this type of simulations in R. The first thing that we need to do is to create a vector which will represent the population that we want to model. 

{% highlight r %}
#Parameters
Total_pop<-10000
df<-rep(1, Total_pop)
{% endhighlight %}

The elements of the vector represent the member of the population and the values the status of the subjets. In our case we assing 1 to non-infected but susceptible members, 0 are dead subjects, 2 are immune members and values > 3 represent infected members. As you can imagine you can expand this as much as you like just by adding new rules that you can check during the progression of the disease. 

Now that we have our population, we can infect the patient-zero[link]()

patient_zero<-sample(which(df==1),1)
df[patient_zero]<-3

And we can start tracking the progression of the dissease with a for loop. In this case I define each iteration as a single day but you can change that to study quicker or slower processes (e.g. 1 iteration/second, 1 iteration/year). 

for(i in 1:time){
  df[df>=3]<-df[df>=3]+1
  
As you can see, the first thing that we do during each iteration (day) is to change the status of the infected by adding 1 to them.
Next we find out how many people gets infected. We compute that using two factors: the number of people in contact with each other and the probability of getting infected if you are contacted by an infected one:

for (k in 1:length(which(df>=3))) {
    round_contacts<-sample(which(df!=0),contact_rate)
    new_infected<-vector()
    for (l in 1:length(round_contacts)) {
      if(runif(1, min = 0, max = 1)<=Infection_rate) new_infected<-c(new_infected,round_contacts[l] )
      
    }
    new_infected<-length(new_infected)
    if(new_infected>0){
      
      if(length(which(df==1))<new_infected){
        new_infected<-length(which(df==1))
      }
    
    new_infected<-sample(which(df==1),new_infected)
    df[new_infected]<-3}
  }
  
The advantage of using these parameters is that it is possible to account for quarentines or more sparse areas/countries at the same time that we account for the ability of an infective agent to propagate. In the multivariate functions those parameters are combined in the R0 parameter[](); however as you can see we don't need it. 

Next, we compute the number of deceased:

  #Deaths
  infected<-which(df>=3)
  for (j in 1:length(infected)) {
    if(runif(1, min=0, max = 1)< ((1-Survival_rate)/silent_infection)) df[infected[j]]<-0
  }  
  
Then, we asume that patients after reaching certain day get cured and that they become immune, in my model this events happen in a deterministic way but they can be computed as probabilities like the infections or deaths.

if(length(which(df>=3+silent_infection))>0) df[which(df>=3+silent_infection)]<-2
  
Finally, we save the status of the population as a row in a large matrix(progression[i,]<-df), so we can explore it after the simulation is completed. 

And that's it!! We are done.

We can make this process more complex by adding more constrains of more vectors to represent for instance other countries/cities with other densities/inmune people but the core of the simulation is done, we only need to start playing around and ploting the results.

##Plots and inferences

##Conclusions
